[DOC] Custom resource status (#1678)
strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator: documentation/book/con-custom-resources-status.adoc

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// assembly-custom-resources.adoc

[id='con-custom-resources-status-{context}']
= {ProductName} custom resource status

> The `status` property of a {ProductName}-specific custom resource is configured to capture the _current_ state of the resource and make that information available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `status` property of a {ProductName}-specific custom resource publishes the _current_ state of the resource to users and tools needing that information.
```

Reviewer 2: Slight tweak to tom's edit:

"needing" > "that need".

> Status information is useful for tracking progress related to a resource achieving its _desired_ state, providing the time and reason the state of the resource changed and details of events causing delays.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Status information is useful for tracking progress related to a resource achieving its _desired_ state as defined by the `spec` property. The `status` provides the time and reason the state of the resource changed and details of events preventing or delaying operator from realising the desired state.
```

Reviewer 2: Slight tweak to tom's edit:

"preventing or delaying operator from realising the desired state" > "preventing or delaying the Operator from realizing the desired state."

> NOTE: The status field is different from the spec field, which describes the _desired_ state of an object.

Reviewer: With the suggested changes I don't think we need this sentence.

Reviewer 2: If we keep it, I suggest removing the italics.

Author: Removed

{ProductName} creates and maintains the status of custom resources, periodically evaluating the current state of the custom resource and updating its status accordingly.

Here we see the `status` property specified for a Kafka custom resource.

.Kafka custom resource with status
[source,yaml,subs="attributes+"]
----
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta1
kind: Kafka
metadata:
spec:
  # ...
status:
  conditions: <1>
  listeners: <2>
    plain:
      host: my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap.myproject.svc
      port: 9092
    tls:
      host: my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap.myproject.svc
      port: 9093
    external::
      host: my-cluster-kafka-external-bootstrap.myproject.svc
      Port: 9094
    ready: true <3>
    # ...

> ----

Reviewer 3: Note: the status for nodeport external listeners is still under development and will not give a specific IP address in the status section.

> ----

Author: I've added the new config and the note.

<1> Status `conditions` describe criteria related to the status that cannot be deduced from the existing resource information, or are specific to the instance of a resource.
<2> The `listeners` describe the current Kafka bootstrap addresses by type.

> <3> The `ready` field indicates whether the resource has been successfully reconciled (approved for traffic by the cluster operator).

Reviewer 2: Cluster Operator in title caps as Kyle suggests.

.Accessing status information

> You can access status information for a resource from the command line. For more information, see xref:proc-accessing-resource-status-{context}[].

Reviewer: This comment might not be actionable, but I feel it needs to be made nonetheless: The splitting up of the conceptual and procedural info into different assemblies is really unhelpful to the reader here. We've just explained the structure of the `status` property. Now is the perfect time to show them how to access it and provide the example output to reinforce the initial understanding they got from the concept. Adding a link is just unhelpful because it means they can't just scroll up and down to cross reference.

Author: Understood. The concepts fit naturally at this level of the doc, but the procedure might be introduced too soon, hence the divide. If @scholzj doesn't mind seeing the procedure in the getting started, I could move it into the custom resources assembly to sit under the concepts

Reviewer 4: I think it really takes away from the _Getting started_. If we want the _Getting started_ chapter to explain details about CRDs, status sub-resources etc., we should IMHO work more on the _Quickstart_. Because the _Getting started: is getting quite quickly far away from serving as _Quickstart_ on the website as it originally did.

Author: We can take a look at the structure again after this release. I'd prefer this content sat together.

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// assembly-custom-resources.adoc

[id='con-custom-resources-status-{context}']

= {ProductName} custom resource status

The `status` property of a {ProductName}-specific custom resource publishes the _current_ state of the resource to users and tools that need the information.

Status information is useful for tracking progress related to a resource achieving its _desired_ state, as defined by the `spec` property. The `status` provides the time and reason the state of the resource changed and details of events preventing or delaying the Operator from realizing the desired state.

> {ProductName} creates and maintains the status of custom resources, periodically evaluating the current state of the custom resource and updating its status accordingly.

Reviewer 4: Should we mention here that:
* The status is not editable when changing the CR it self (e.g. using `kubectl edit`)
* That even changing the status would not affect / reconfigure the Kafka cluster?

Author: When performing an update on a custom resource using `{kubectl} edit`, for example, its `status` is not editable. Moreover, changing the `status` would not affect the configuration of the Kafka cluster.

IMPORTANT: The status property feature for {ProductName}-specific custom resources is still under development and only available for Kafka resources.

Here we see the `status` property specified for a Kafka custom resource.

.Kafka custom resource with status
[source,yaml,subs="attributes+"]
----
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta1
kind: Kafka
metadata:
spec:
  # ...
status:
  conditions: <1>
  - lastTransitionTime: 2019-06-02T23:46:57+0000
    status: "True"
    type: Ready <2>
  listeners: <3>
  - addresses:
    - host: my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap.myproject.svc
      port: 9092
    type: plain
  - addresses:
    - host: my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap.myproject.svc
      port: 9093
    type: tls
  - addresses:
    - host: 172.29.49.180
      port: 9094
    type: external
    # ...
----
<1> Status `conditions` describe criteria related to the status that cannot be deduced from the existing resource information, or are specific to the instance of a resource.
<2> The `Ready` condition indicates whether the Cluster Operator currently considers the Kafka cluster able to handle traffic.
<3> The `listeners` describe the current Kafka bootstrap addresses by type.
+

> IMPORTANT: The status for `external` listeners is still under development and does not provide a specific IP address.

Reviewer 3: IMPORTANT: The status for `external` listeners is still under development and does not provide a specific IP address for external listeners of type "nodeport".

< @PaulRMellor  It still can provide specific IP address for external listeners of type "loadbalancer" just not for type "nodeport">
